# 18-202: Mathematical Foundations of Electrical Engineering

| Category | Difficulty |
| :------: | :--------: |
|   HW     |     4      |
|  Exams   |     5      |
| Quizzes  |     2      |

Required core corequisite for ECE majors. This course is a broad introduction to the branches of mathematics applied
in electrical engineering, including: linear algebra, differential equations, and some complex/vector calculus. While it is
not explicitly a prerequisite, many core ECE courses, especially in the signal processing/circuits paths, will reference 
topics learned in 18-202. This is an applied mathematics course that mix rigor with motivation and intuition.

Due to its breadth, the course moves relatively briskly through topics, relying on students to stay on track through
recitation and assigned readings. Topic lectures are also supplemented by "Idea lectures" which
demonstrate real-world applications of the topics being taught. While these are interesting to listen to,
students shouldn't worry to much about retaining the details as they are rarely included substantially in exam questions.

**Important:** Many ECE students might look for a minor or additional major in robotics. Although students can take this course to fulfill the Mathematical Foundation requirement for ECE instead of taking two courses from 21-259, 21-241, 21-254, and 21-260, an additional major or minor in robotics would still require 21-259 even though students have taken 18-202 due to a difference between departments.

The grading might differ very differently according to different professors 
though it is usually graded on a bucket system. 
In some semesters, there would be a total of 1080 homework points, earning 900 points fulfills 100% of the homework bucket. This allows for a generous margin of points to be lost before students cross any grade thresholds. (For exams, 360 points are available but only 300 maximum are counted towards the final grade). In other semesters, there would be a total of 990 homework points instead (see Grading Algorithm section for reference). It is also possible that no bonus points are awarded each homework in some harsh semesters.

The Mathematical Foundations requirement can also be fulfilled by taking 2 of the following instead:
- [21-259: Calculus in Three Dimensions](math_science_reqs/21259.md)
- [21-241: Matrices and Linear Transformations](math_science_reqs/21241.md)
- [21-254: Linear Algebra and Vector Calculus for Engineers](math_science_reqs/21254.md)
- 21-260: Differential Equations

## Prerequisites

In order to take 18-202, students must first take 21-122: Integration and Approximation or have taken AP
Calculus BC before attending Carnegie Mellon. It is also useful to be familiar with some linear algebra or differential equation 
concepts before taking 18-202.

## Grading Algorithm

The grading algorithm can vary greatly due to a possible change of both professors
teaching the course. Here is a typical version while modifications might be made:
Homework:   20% (9 homeworks, 110 points per homework, 900 points total)
In-class Quizzes:   10% (9 quizzes, 5 points per quiz)
Midterm Exams:  40% (2 exams, 110 points each, 200 points total)
Final Exam: 30% (1 exam, 110 points, 100 points total)

The lowest homework score and the lowest quiz score will be dropped in calculating your grade. Note that the homeworks and exams include 10 bonus points each.

## Lectures

Lectures will be presented in person and will include slides and handwriting. Lecture
notes and slide presentations will be posted after lecture, and the lecture recording will be available via Canvas. Detail might also differ each semester.

## Homeworks

Homeworks are assigned on a weekly basis, and length can vary. Each homework can include proofs, drill questions, 
or conceptual questions. Students will be expected to use Python or MATLAB to carry out certain linear algebra/matrix operations.
For those unfamiliar with the software, there is a TA-led bootcamp at the start of the semester.
A good way to get a feel for how much work students are expected to show to earn full points is by
working through problems in TA-led recitations. Homeworks can be conceptually difficult or plain
tedious, so getting started early is recommended.

## Quizzes

Similar to the grading algorithm section, quizzes might also differ greatly depending on professors. Here is an example from one semester:
There will be 9 in-the-lecture quizzes, each quiz corresponding to one homework
assignment. There will be only one multiple choice question on each quiz. The quiz answers will be graded on a binary basis, i.e., full credit for the correct answers and no credit for other answers. 
The quiz questions will be nearly identical to the homework problems, except for changes in some details. So, students mastering the homework assignment
questions should do well in the in-the-lecture quizzes. 
Professors will not announce the timing of quizzes in advance, which means students have to be present to each lecture for not missing a quiz.

## Exams

This part also differs depending on different professors for the semester. We provide two versions from two different semesters as follows:
### Version 1:
18-202 has 3 Exams which account for 75% of a student's final grade. Students are allowed to bring
a note sheet (up to 3 by the final exam), but the exam is otherwise closed-book.<sup>1</sup> Due to the note sheet,
exams are not reliant on rote memorization of topics and methods. Some TAs will emphasize topics or question
forms that may appear on the exams during recitation, which may give you an idea of what to anticipate.
Since exams are cumulative, the faculty-led exam review recitations can also be helpful for 
determining which topics to revisit from past units. Exam questions are structured very similarly to
homework questions, including True/False, conceptual, and drill questions. Make sure you are
familiar with matrix/set characteristics and their definitions. It is possible to lose up to 20 points
in each exam without penalty to your final grade (due to the bucket system), so while exams may
be difficult, you do not need to do exceptionally well to get a high final grade.

<sup>1</sup> During the 2020/2021 Pandemic, exams were online-proctored, open-book, and untimed.

### Version 2:
There will be two midterm exams and one final exam given during the semester,
scheduled respectively during lecture time and the final exam time slot. 
Exams are cumulative and closed-book, and will be held in person. Students are allowed
(also cumulatively) one new sheet (double-sided) of notes per exam. In other words,
one sheet for the first midterm exam, two sheets for the second midterm exam, and
three sheets for the final exam.

## How to do well

- For certain foundational topics, attending TA-led Bootcamps can be helpful as a refresher or 
  introduction for unfamiliar students.
- Make sure to attend recitations as homework problems tend to mirror the questions that the TAs
  lead you through fairly closely. Some TAs will also drop hints/answer questions about homework
  solutions.
- Remember that the course grading operates on a bucket system. This typically allows for students
  to make up for lost points fairly easily in future assignments, including exams and quizzes.
- If you choose to use LaTeX for homework assignments, make sure that you are comfortable with
  typing and styling matrices, as doing so can be tedious and time-consuming. (Overleaf has a 
  fairly extensive [guide](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Matrices) on how to typeset 
  matrices using the `amsmath` package.)
